[MUSIC]
>> Douglas: I think of programming
languages as being in two very distinct
classes, systems languages and
application languages.
A systems language is a language that
you would use for writing system stuff.
Something that needs to be close
to the metal like a kernel,
a device driver, a memory manager.
That kind of low level stuff and
nothing else.
Everything else should be written
in application languages.
Now we need a new system language,
our dominant system language is still
C which comes from the late 60s.
That was a long, long time ago,
we seem to have lost the ability
to innovate in system languages and
it's not like we don't need them anymore.
I think we need a better version of C,
but it's a long time coming.
But I'm more concerned with
the application languages,
because that's where we all live and
we need better application languages.
I think a mistake that you
can see in lots of languages
is that they're confused about which
side of this line that they're on.
For example, for my money the biggest
design error in Java was it couldn't
decide if it wanted to be a system
language or an application language.
And one of the signs of that is
that it requires the use of threads
at the application level.
Which I think was a tragic
mistake due from that confusion.
So you can take the application languages
and divide them into two classes.
There's the classical school and
the prototypal school.
And for a long time I've been
an advocate of the prototypal school
because of the obvious problems
that are in the classical school.
That you've got the classification
taxonomy problem that we talked
about earlier.
Back when the goto argument was going on,
maybe at its loudest, someone published
an article saying we should also
eliminate the come-from statement.
And it was a joke of it and there were
people who attempted to design programming
languages based on
the come-from statement.
But it turns out we have
come-from statements in
our classical languages
except we call it extends.
And what it does has cause coupling of
things and coupling can be a problem.
When you couple things together, then one
becomes dependent on the other you cannot
change them independently anymore.
And that causes systems to become brittle
and that happens in class systems.
And so the big advantage in prototypal
systems is we eliminate that coupling.
Or we at least reduce it significantly,
such that that no longer becomes
a problem or a barrier to progress.
So, as a big advocate of
prototype inheritance.
Since then I've changed my mind,
that the biggest benefit you get from
prototypes is memory conservation.
And I think that might have been
important, probably was important.
Well, maybe it wasn't important in 1995.
It's not so important now, that we've
had memory has become so abundant.
You now have gigabytes of
RAM in your pocket and
when you just can't
imagine that much memory.
You really don't understand numbers
that big, but we still think about
memory as though it's doled out in k.
So may have made sense then,
not so much now.
It also is a source of confusion that
we have owned properties and inherited
properties which for some purposes act
the same, but for some purposes don't.
I'm looking to get rid of
all sources of confusion
as you know because confusion
causes bugs and exploits.
It also provides retroactive heredity
that you can change what an object
inherits after it's constructed.
I've not found any good uses for this, but
I can imagine a lot of really bad uses for
it and it's something that is
provided by this architecture.
One bad thing about it is
performance inhibiting.
So JavaScript engines go fast by making
assumptions about the shape of objects.
And they have to be pessimistic
when it comes to prototype chains.
Because a prototype chain can
change its contents at any time and
they need to be prepared for
that and that slows things down.
So, I used to be in favor
of prototypal inheritance,
I'm now in favor of class free
object-oriented programming.
I think class free object-oriented
programming is JavaScript's gift to
humanity.
I think that's why this
is an important language.
It's why I hope it becomes
an influential language.
So let's review this again.
So this is block scope.
And we've got functions which have
the same scope relationship and
we've got our closure again.
And we've got this
really important form where we have
a function that returns a function.
And this is I think the best most
important discovery in the history
of programming and
we have it in this silly little language.
>> Douglas: So to review one last time,
this is the model that I recommend for
doing object-oriented for
doing class free object-oriented
programming using functions in JavaScript.
We've got a constructor which
takes a specification object.
We make our instance
variables which we can
initialize from the specification object.
We get other methods or other functions
that we can use that we can get
from other constructors and
we can call as many of these as we like.
We then create our methods which
will close over all of the members,
all of the other methods, all of our
methods and the specification object.
And any of these which need to be public,
we will put in the outgoing
object which we then freeze.
By doing this, we get an object
which has a hard interface,
an uncorruptable will interface.
It will always work exactly the way
it should, it cannot be confused.
And it also corrects,
I think a problem that we've always had in
objects in that some things you
want to access through a method.
And some simply by poking
at the properties.
Except if you allow people
to poke at the properties,
then there is no defense
against inconsistency.
Everything, all changes at least to the
object should go through the interfaces.